CAM UI validation gate
Date: 2026-06-01

Status: historical validation-design note. The integration fuzz and ABI
normalization work this page motivated has since been implemented and
characterized. Use notes/011_architecture_composition_audit_2026_07_05.md,
notes/012_abi_traversal_inventory.md, and AGENTS.md for current sequencing and
stop criteria; keep this page as rationale for validation gates, not as a live
backlog.

Problem
-------

The local GUI reached a real Anvil deployment and failed with:

    CAM route output expected bigint integer at entry.0.status

That failure is valuable because it exposes the wrong test boundary. The
contract, ABI, CAM manifest, viewer packages, and browser app all looked
reasonable in isolation. The failure appeared only when real viem decoding from
Anvil produced a runtime value shape that our mocked package tests did not
model.

The product risk is larger than this one integer-normalization bug. CAM is a UI
and agent interface derived from contracts. For the final product, deployment
must not mean "the contracts compile and the React app starts." Deployment must
mean:

    the exact onchain app, exact CAM resources, exact ABI resources, exact
    viewer packages, and exact browser renderer have been exercised together.


What the current tests prove
----------------------------

The repo currently has useful but incomplete layers:

1. Python checks
   They validate repo shape, manifests, ABI references, integrity metadata,
   import policy, Docker posture, and silent-default patterns.

2. Solidity unit tests
   They test selected contract behavior. The bike app now also has scenario
   tests for app-shaped workflows that cross registration, lookup, status
   changes, permissions, and UI projection.

3. TypeScript package tests
   They test CAM parsing, UI parsing, route resolution, EVM adapter behavior,
   and viewer session behavior. These are mostly example-based and many EVM
   paths use mocked viem values.

4. Local viewer targets
   They remain useful manual scenarios. They boot Anvil, deploy a fixture,
   serve CAM resources, and open a terminal or GUI.

5. CAM integration fuzz targets
   They deploy or attach to a CAM host, load the real CAM bundle, walk resolved
   UI actions, and optionally simulate or send writes. These are assertion-
   driven bridge tests over the exact route/viewer/resource path that manual
   local scenarios exercise.

The important boundary is the one where the original bug occurred:

    real contract -> real ABI -> real viem decoding -> CAM value normalization
    -> UI resolution -> renderer


Why "more mocks" is not enough
------------------------------

Mocks are necessary for small package tests, but they cannot be the deployment
gate. They encode our assumptions. The status bug survived because the mock
said "integer outputs are bigint", while the real client path produced a small
integer as a number.

Mocks should be used for:

- parser and resolver edge cases;
- exact error behavior;
- impossible or hard-to-create malformed values;
- package-local unit tests.

Mocks should not be used as the only proof that a dapp's CAM works.


Where fuzzing belongs
---------------------

Fuzzing is useful, but it must be aimed at the right surfaces.

1. Solidity fuzz tests
   Own contract input space:

   - serial-number validation;
   - role boundaries;
   - status transitions;
   - delegation expiry;
   - metadata update rules;
   - write functions never bypass manager authorization.

2. Solidity invariant tests
   Own persistent onchain state:

   - retired components cannot return to active;
   - missing/active transitions are controlled;
   - token owner and manager record do not drift;
   - permissions cannot appear for unregistered components;
   - component records with status None are not treated as real components;
   - delegation capabilities never exceed what the owner granted.

3. TypeScript property tests
   Own protocol shape:

   - inert value validation rejects mutable or non-serializable values;
   - expression resolution is closed over allowed roots;
   - UI Include resolution terminates or fails on cycles;
   - route input declarations are enforced;
   - ABI output normalization accepts exactly the decoded values the adapter
     promises to support;
   - malformed CAM/UI resources fail closed.

4. Differential/fixture tests
   Own mocked-versus-real assumptions:

   - for representative ABI types, compare mocked route output fixtures against
     real viem-decoded output shapes;
   - ensure fixture values use the same shape as real clients, or deliberately
     test both.

Fuzzing should not replace real integration tests. It should make each layer
more hostile to hidden assumptions.


Real-RPC integration gate
-------------------------

The repo now has Docker-backed real-RPC integration lanes. They use the same
local scenario pieces as the manual viewer, but run as assertions instead of
operator inspection.

Read-only target:

    make test-integration-fuzz-bike-nft

Write-enabled variant:

    make test-integration-fuzz-with-writes-bike-nft

Runtime shape:

    1. Start Anvil on an internal Compose network.
    2. Deploy the bike fixture with Forge.
    3. Serve dapps/bike-nft/cam over HTTP.
    4. Run the generic CAM integration-fuzz Node container.
    5. The test container loads the deployed CamRoot through @cam/viewer.
    6. It performs deterministic random walks through route-exposed actions.
    7. It asserts resolved UI data, prepared calls, and, in write mode,
       successful simulation for exposed write actions.

This remains a test service, not a manual terminal. Its posture should stay:

- no host port by default;
- no repository root mount;
- read-only package workspace input;
- read-only node_modules;
- internal network access only to Anvil and CAM HTTP;
- read-only access to the Forge broadcast output needed to discover CamRoot;
- bounded memory/PIDs;
- no dependency installation;
- no browser unless it is the explicit browser lane.

The first regression class is now covered by this layer:

    viewEntry(account) from real Anvil normalizes AppView.status to the
    canonical inert value expected by CAM, without relying on mocked bigint
    fixture output.


Browser validation gate
-----------------------

The package-level viewer test proves the headless state machine. The browser
still needs its own gate because rendering and wallet preparation are product
surface.

Proposed target:

    make bike-nft-viewer-e2e

Runtime shape:

    1. Start Anvil.
    2. Deploy the bike fixture.
    3. Serve CAM resources.
    4. Start cam-web behind the local RPC/CAM gateway.
    5. Run Playwright or an equivalent browser runner in a container.
    6. Assert browser-visible UI states and interactions.

Initial browser assertions:

- page loads without CAM host, CAM parse, ABI, route, or UI errors;
- entry view renders title, account, register capability, and actions;
- lookup with empty serial stays in the expected empty-component state;
- lookup with seeded serial renders component.found data;
- register route renders register.empty and register.ready states;
- Prepare write validates/simulates before opening a wallet transaction;
- failed simulation displays a useful error, not an opaque gas-limit failure;
- successful write path updates the route after confirmation;
- no unresolved expression text is visible in the DOM;
- no sentinel zero address is shown in views where the contract selected a
  state that should not display it.

The browser lane should include screenshot capture only as secondary evidence.
The primary assertions should be semantic DOM and viewer-state checks.


Deployment-grade CAM validation
-------------------------------

A dapp should not be deployable as a "validated CAM app" unless all of these
are true:

1. Static manifest checks pass.
   CAM references only declared namespaces, pinned resources, valid ABI URIs,
   declared route kinds, and known UI nodes.

2. Resource integrity is closed.
   main.json pins all ABI/UI resources it loads. Unsigned CAM hashes are allowed
   only in explicit local fixtures, never as a production default.

3. Solidity tests pass.
   Unit, fuzz, and invariant tests cover the contract's business rules.

4. Real-RPC integration passes.
   The deployed app is loaded through CamRoot and exercised through the viewer
   packages against Anvil.

5. Browser E2E passes.
   The graphical viewer renders the expected UI and handles read/write flows
   using the same local deployment.

6. Write preparation is preflighted.
   Every CAM write action that the UI exposes must be simulatable before the
   wallet is asked to sign.

7. Error surfaces are checked.
   Reverts, malformed resources, unsupported hosts, wrong chains, and failed
   simulations must produce useful errors.


Avoid these false comforts
--------------------------

Do not treat these as sufficient:

- only checking TypeScript types;
- only parsing CAM JSON;
- only rendering React components with fake data;
- only running mocked viewer package tests;
- only doing manual browser checks;
- only checking screenshots;
- only relying on wallet failure messages;
- only testing the happy path with one seeded component.

Those checks are useful, but none of them validates the whole contract-defined
UI boundary.


Historical near-term implementation order
-----------------------------------------

This was the initial June 2026 sequence. Recheck the repo and current notes
before treating any item here as still open.

1. Fix the current integer normalization bug and add a small package regression
   test for number-valued integer outputs.

2. Keep extending the real-RPC headless integration-fuzz lane.
   This is the most important current test because it catches
   adapter/client/ABI mismatches without adding browser complexity.

3. Add browser E2E after the headless integration lane is stable.
   Use the same Compose fixture so the browser test does not invent a second
   scenario.

4. Add Foundry fuzz and invariant tests for BicycleComponentManager.
   These should focus on contract rules, not UI rendering.

5. Add property tests for CAM/UI protocol packages if the repo accepts a pinned
   property-testing dependency. If not, use deterministic generators first.


Core principle
--------------

CAM validation must follow the trust boundary:

    contracts own authority;
    CAM resources describe interaction;
    viewers render and prepare execution;
    tests must exercise the handoff between all three.

The final deployment gate should be boring and strict: if the exact deployed
contract, exact manifest, exact ABI, exact UI resource, and exact viewer cannot
survive an automated local-chain run, the dapp is not ready to publish.
